.Dd January 13, 2017
.Dt PC-UPDATEMANAGER 8
.Os TrueOS Rolling Release
.\"----------------------------------------------------------------
.Sh NAME
.Nm pc-updatemanager
.Nd System update utility for TrueOS.
.\"----------------------------------------------------------------
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op <command> <args>
.\"----------------------------------------------------------------
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
utility finds and installs updates to TrueOS.
There are numerous commands used with
.Nm
that install updates and manage system branches.
.Pp
.\" Here are the options:
All commands automatically boot-strap the updater to its latest verion.
.Pp
Here are the available commands:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Ic branches
List available system branches.
.It Ic chbranch Ar branchname
Change to a new system branch.
.It Ic check
Checks for system updates.
.It Ic showeol
Show end of life (support) date for this release.
.It Ic install Ar update1, update2, ...
Install specified update(s).
.It Ic pkgcheck
Check for updates to packages.
.It Ic pkgupdate Ar -f
Installs package updates. Invoking the
.Fl f
flag forces package updates, restoring all packages to a pristine working condition.
.It Ic syncconf
Update TrueOS pkg configuration.
.It Ic confcheck
Check TrueOS pkg configuration
.It Ic cron
Perform delayed check for system and pkg updates.
.\"----------------------------------------------------------------
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It pc-updatemanager pkgupdate -f
Force an update to all installed packages.
.\"----------------------------------------------------------------
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Pa /usr/local/share/trueos/pc-updatemanager/conf/sysupdate.conf
Configuration settings for TrueOS Updater Service
.\"----------------------------------------------------------------
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr beadm(1),
.Xr pkg(8)
.\"----------------------------------------------------------------
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Tim Moore
.Aq timmoore88@gmail.com
