luminaintro.rst, before:

.. _Introduction to Lumina:

Introduction to |lumina|
************************

The Lumina Desktop Environment (|lumina| for short) is a lightweight,
XDG-compliant, BSD-licensed desktop environment focused on streamlining
work efficiency with minimal system overhead. It is specifically
designed for |trueos| and FreeBSD, but has also been ported to many other
BSD and Linux operating systems. It is based on the Qt graphical toolkit
and the Fluxbox window manager, and uses a small number of X utilities
for various tasks, such as :command:`numlockx` and :command:`xscreensaver`.

|lumina|'s features include:

* Very little system overhead.

* Does not require any of the desktop implementation frameworks such as
  DBUS, policykit, consolekit, systemd, or HALD.

* Does not come bundled with any applications such as web browsers,
  email clients, multimedia software, or office suites. Instead, it
  provides utilities for configuring the desktop environment.

* Uses a simple,
  `text-based configuration file <https://github.com/trueos/lumina/blob/master/src-qt5/core/lumina-desktop/defaults/luminaDesktop.conf>`_
  for setting system-wide defaults. |lumina| distributors can use this
  file to easily preset the |lumina| defaults and interface for their
  distribution.

* Provides a plugin-based interface design. The user can make their
  desktop as light or heavy as they wish by choosing which plugins to
  have running on their desktop and panels. This plugin-based system is
  similar to Android or other modern operating systems.
  
* A single, easy-to-use :ref:`Lumina Configuration` utility controls all
  the different configuration options for the desktop in one location.

* Intelligent "favorites" system for creating quick shortcuts to
  applications, files, and directories.

* ZFS file restore functionality through the :ref:`Insight File Manager`.

* Multi-monitor support includes the :ref:`Lumina Xconfig` graphical
  utility for adding or removing monitors from the |lumina| session.

* Simple system controls through the system menu for configuring audio
  volume, screen brightness, battery status/notifications, and workspace
  switching.

* Total system search capabilities through the resource friendly
  :ref:`Lumina Search` utility.

* Screenshot functionality through :ref:`Lumina Screenshot`, which is
  also tied to the :kbd:`Print Screen` key by default.

.. _Install and Start Lumina:

Install and Start Lumina®
=========================

|lumina| is available as a pre-built package for numerous operating
systems. The `Get Lumina® <http://lumina-desktop.org/get-lumina/>`_
section of the webpage includes installation instructions for each
supported system.

In addition to pre-built packages, the
`Lumina® source repository <https://github.com/trueos/lumina>`_
is available on GitHub so that developers can contribute code or create
packages for other distributions. If you plan to compile |lumina| from
source, refer to the
`DEPENDENCIES <https://github.com/trueos/lumina/blob/master/DEPENDENCIES>`_
file and ensure all dependent software is installed and to the
`README <https://github.com/trueos/lumina/blob/master/README.md>`_ file
for build instructions.

After installing |lumina|, no startup configuration is needed when
installed on a |trueos| system as the PCDM login manager will
automatically display |lumina| in the login menu. Simply log out, select
|lumina|, and log back in.

.. note:: When using a system with no graphical login manager, type
          :command:`start-lumina-desktop` to start |lumina|.
   
The rest of this Handbook describes the Lumina Configuration utility,
other various utilities built into |lumina|, and |lumina| plugins. Also, the
handbook shows how to be involved improving |lumina| as well as
reproducing the change log for each major release of |lumina|.

.. _Initial Settings:

Initial Settings
================

When freshly installed, |lumina| will implement a number of default
plugins and options for the user. All these first time defaults are
configurable, with the numerous options covered in the
:ref:`Lumina Plugins` section of the handbook.

.. note:: The default desktop appearance can vary if using another
          distrubution's custom configuration of the |lumina| Desktop
          Project.
  
.. _lumina1e:

.. figure:: images/lumina1e.png
   :scale: 50%

   : Lumina Desktop

:numref:`Figure %s <lumina1e>` is a screenshot of Lumina using its
default settings. The user has clicked the "|lumina|" icon in
order to open the start menu.

The Start Menu provides quick access for user interaction with the
system. The top frame is a search bar for rapidly finding specific
items. Just underneath the search bar is a small field indicating which
user is logged in. Also, If the system has a battery, you can hover over
the battery icon (not pictured) on the opposite side of the user name to
display the current status of the battery and the estimated time
remaining if the battery is discharging. The remaining space of the
start menu is divided into several categories:

* **Favorites:** This element is the largest section of the menu. Click
  an entry to launch that application. Right-click an entry to
  :guilabel:`Remove from Favorites` or to :guilabel:`Add to Quicklaunch`.
  In |lumina|, Favorites appear in this section of the start menu and
  :guilabel:`QuickLaunch` adds a button for the application to the panel
  next to the start menu button.

* **Browse Files:** Used to browse for files and directories using the
  :ref:`Insight File Manager`. One available action in this file manager
  is the ability to add a file or directory to the list of Favorites.
  Simply select the file or directory and click the :guilabel:`star`
  icon in Insight.

* **Browse Applications:** Click this entry to browse all applications
  currently registered on the system. Applications are listed
  alphabetically by category. The :guilabel:`Show Categories` button has
  three modes which are changed by clicking the button: category names
  (checked box), no categories (unchecked box), and categories with
  contents (half-checked box).
  
  Click an application's name to start the application. Right-click an
  application's name to view choices for :guilabel:`Pin to Desktop`,
  :guilabel:`Add to Favorites`, or :guilabel:`Add to Quicklaunch`. Using
  |trueos| or another operating system with a pre-defined application
  store will add a :guilabel:`Manage Applications` button at the top of
  the applications list. Click it to open the specific operating
  system's application store. For example, on a |trueos| system,
  :guilabel:`Manage Applications` opens |appcafe|. Click
  :guilabel:`Back` to return to the start menu.

* **Control Panel:** If using |trueos| or an operating system with
  a control panel, click this entry to open the operating system's
  control panel.

* **Preferences:** Click this entry to access a number of options:

    * **Configure Desktop:** This entry opens the
      :ref:`Lumina Configuration` utility.

    * **Lumina Desktop Information:** Click the :guilabel:`?` icon to
      determine the installed version of |lumina|.

    * **System Volume:** Use the mouse to move the volume control
      slider to change the system audio volume from 0% to 100%. Click
      the sound icon on the left to mute or unmute the speaker. If the
      operating system provides a mixer utility, click the speaker icon
      on the right to launch the mixer utility for advanced control of
      the audio system.

    * **Screen Brightness:** Use the mouse to move the brightness
      control slider from 10% to 100%.

    * **Workspace:** The number of available virtual workspaces are
      listed. Click the right or left arrow to switch between workspaces.

    * **Locale:** This will only appear if the lumina-i18n package is
      installed. The current locale will be displayed as the title of
      the drop-down menu. Click the drop-down menu to select another
      locale for this session. Refer to :ref:`User Settings` for more
      information on fine-tuning the locale settings.

    * **Back:** Click to return to the start menu.
  
* **Leave:** Click this entry to view options to
  :guilabel:`Suspend System` (if supported by the operating system,
  press the system's power button to login and resume operation),
  :guilabel:`Restart System` (if the user has permission),
  :guilabel:`Power Off System` (if the user has permission),
  :guilabel:`Sign Out User`, or press :guilabel:`Back` to return to the
  start menu. Alternately, click the :guilabel:`lock` icon next to
  :guilabel:`Leave` to lock the system, which will start the screensaver
  and password prompt to resume the session.

.. note:: On a |trueos| system which is applying updates, the shutdown 
   and restart options will be disabled until the updates are complete,
   with a note indicating updates are in progress.

.. _Panel and System Tray:

Panel and System Tray
=====================

By default, |lumina| provides a panel at the bottom of the screen with a
system tray at the far right of the panel. This section describes the
default layout. For instructions on how to configure the panel, refer to
the :ref:`Interface` section.
  
When opening windows or applications, a button will be added to the
section of the panel near the start menu. If the application provides
an icon, the button will appear with the icon and descriptive text.
Mouse over the button to show the full name of the application. Each
open window or application will have its own button on the panel. Click
a button to make that window active; click it again to minimize it.

Right-click the title of an open window to open a menu of options,
including stick, layer/dock, and set transparency, among other options.

The system tray is located in the right portion of the panel. Any
applications that register a tray icon will appear in this area. For
example, on a |trueos| system, icons will appear for Life Preserver, 
Mount Tray, and SysAdm™. Refer to :ref:`Interface` for instructions on
modifying which applications appear in the system tray. Click or
right-click an icon to interact with an application directly. The
current system time shown by the clock is in the default format for the
current locale. If you click the clock icon and then click "Time Zone",
a menu will open where you can select to either "Use System Time" or
click a country name in order to select a city to change to that city's
time zone.

.. index:: desktop context menu
.. _Desktop Context Menu:

Desktop Context Menu
====================

Right-clicking the desktop will open a menu of quick shortcuts with the
title of the menu indicating the name of the current workspace. This
section describes the default menu items. For instructions on how to
configure the right-click menu, refer to the
:ref:`Interface` section of this handbook.

By default, the right-click menu contains the following items:

* **Terminal:** Used to launch a system terminal. The default is
  :command:`xterm`, but this can be customized.

* **Browse Files:** Launches the default file manager.
  (:ref:`Insight File Manager` for Lumina)

* **Applications:** Provides shortcuts to the operating system's
  graphical software management utility (if available), the control
  panel (if the operating system provides one), and the applications
  currently registered on the system, arranged by system category.

* **Preferences:** Contains shortcuts to the screensaver preferences,
  desktop utility (:ref:`Lumina Configuration`), display configuration
  (:ref:`Lumina Xconfig`), the operating system's control panel, and
  |lumina| version information contained within "About |lumina|".

* **Leave:** Opens the system log out window, with options to log out of
  the desktop session, restart the system (if the user has permission),
  shutdown the system (if the user has permission), cancel the log out
  window, lock the system, or suspend the system (if the operating
  system supports suspend mode).

Commit message:

License description addition: - Added a preface to luminaintro.rst to acknowledge and provide a link to the license.

luminaintro.rst, after:

**Preface**

The |lumina| Handbook is freely available for sharing and redistribution
under the terms of the
`Creative Commons Attribution License <https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/>`_.
This means you have permission to copy, distribute, translate, and adapt
the work as long as you attribute the |lumina| Project as the original
source of the Handbook.

.. _Introduction to Lumina:

Introduction to |lumina|
************************

The Lumina Desktop Environment (|lumina| for short) is a lightweight,
XDG-compliant, BSD-licensed desktop environment focused on streamlining
work efficiency with minimal system overhead. It is specifically
designed for |trueos| and FreeBSD, but has also been ported to many other
BSD and Linux operating systems. It is based on the Qt graphical toolkit
and the Fluxbox window manager, and uses a small number of X utilities
for various tasks, such as :command:`numlockx` and :command:`xscreensaver`.

|lumina|'s features include:

* Very little system overhead.

* Does not require any of the desktop implementation frameworks such as
  DBUS, policykit, consolekit, systemd, or HALD.

* Does not come bundled with any applications such as web browsers,
  email clients, multimedia software, or office suites. Instead, it
  provides utilities for configuring the desktop environment.

* Uses a simple,
  `text-based configuration file <https://github.com/trueos/lumina/blob/master/src-qt5/core/lumina-desktop/defaults/luminaDesktop.conf>`_
  for setting system-wide defaults. |lumina| distributors can use this
  file to easily preset the |lumina| defaults and interface for their
  distribution.

* Provides a plugin-based interface design. The user can make their
  desktop as light or heavy as they wish by choosing which plugins to
  have running on their desktop and panels. This plugin-based system is
  similar to Android or other modern operating systems.
  
* A single, easy-to-use :ref:`Lumina Configuration` utility controls all
  the different configuration options for the desktop in one location.

* Intelligent "favorites" system for creating quick shortcuts to
  applications, files, and directories.

* ZFS file restore functionality through the :ref:`Insight File Manager`.

* Multi-monitor support includes the :ref:`Lumina Xconfig` graphical
  utility for adding or removing monitors from the |lumina| session.

* Simple system controls through the system menu for configuring audio
  volume, screen brightness, battery status/notifications, and workspace
  switching.

* Total system search capabilities through the resource friendly
  :ref:`Lumina Search` utility.

* Screenshot functionality through :ref:`Lumina Screenshot`, which is
  also tied to the :kbd:`Print Screen` key by default.

.. _Install and Start Lumina:

Install and Start Lumina®
=========================

|lumina| is available as a pre-built package for numerous operating
systems. The `Get Lumina® <http://lumina-desktop.org/get-lumina/>`_
section of the webpage includes installation instructions for each
supported system.

In addition to pre-built packages, the
`Lumina® source repository <https://github.com/trueos/lumina>`_
is available on GitHub so that developers can contribute code or create
packages for other distributions. If you plan to compile |lumina| from
source, refer to the
`DEPENDENCIES <https://github.com/trueos/lumina/blob/master/DEPENDENCIES>`_
file and ensure all dependent software is installed and to the
`README <https://github.com/trueos/lumina/blob/master/README.md>`_ file
for build instructions.

After installing |lumina|, no startup configuration is needed when
installed on a |trueos| system as the PCDM login manager will
automatically display |lumina| in the login menu. Simply log out, select
|lumina|, and log back in.

.. note:: When using a system with no graphical login manager, type
          :command:`start-lumina-desktop` to start |lumina|.
   
The rest of this Handbook describes the Lumina Configuration utility,
other various utilities built into |lumina|, and |lumina| plugins. Also, the
handbook shows how to be involved improving |lumina| as well as
reproducing the change log for each major release of |lumina|.

.. _Initial Settings:

Initial Settings
================

When freshly installed, |lumina| will implement a number of default
plugins and options for the user. All these first time defaults are
configurable, with the numerous options covered in the
:ref:`Lumina Plugins` section of the handbook.

.. note:: The default desktop appearance can vary if using another
          distrubution's custom configuration of the |lumina| Desktop
          Project.
  
.. _lumina1e:

.. figure:: images/lumina1e.png
   :scale: 50%

   : Lumina Desktop

:numref:`Figure %s <lumina1e>` is a screenshot of Lumina using its
default settings. The user has clicked the "|lumina|" icon in
order to open the start menu.

The Start Menu provides quick access for user interaction with the
system. The top frame is a search bar for rapidly finding specific
items. Just underneath the search bar is a small field indicating which
user is logged in. Also, If the system has a battery, you can hover over
the battery icon (not pictured) on the opposite side of the user name to
display the current status of the battery and the estimated time
remaining if the battery is discharging. The remaining space of the
start menu is divided into several categories:

* **Favorites:** This element is the largest section of the menu. Click
  an entry to launch that application. Right-click an entry to
  :guilabel:`Remove from Favorites` or to :guilabel:`Add to Quicklaunch`.
  In |lumina|, Favorites appear in this section of the start menu and
  :guilabel:`QuickLaunch` adds a button for the application to the panel
  next to the start menu button.

* **Browse Files:** Used to browse for files and directories using the
  :ref:`Insight File Manager`. One available action in this file manager
  is the ability to add a file or directory to the list of Favorites.
  Simply select the file or directory and click the :guilabel:`star`
  icon in Insight.

* **Browse Applications:** Click this entry to browse all applications
  currently registered on the system. Applications are listed
  alphabetically by category. The :guilabel:`Show Categories` button has
  three modes which are changed by clicking the button: category names
  (checked box), no categories (unchecked box), and categories with
  contents (half-checked box).
  
  Click an application's name to start the application. Right-click an
  application's name to view choices for :guilabel:`Pin to Desktop`,
  :guilabel:`Add to Favorites`, or :guilabel:`Add to Quicklaunch`. Using
  |trueos| or another operating system with a pre-defined application
  store will add a :guilabel:`Manage Applications` button at the top of
  the applications list. Click it to open the specific operating
  system's application store. For example, on a |trueos| system,
  :guilabel:`Manage Applications` opens |appcafe|. Click
  :guilabel:`Back` to return to the start menu.

* **Control Panel:** If using |trueos| or an operating system with
  a control panel, click this entry to open the operating system's
  control panel.

* **Preferences:** Click this entry to access a number of options:

    * **Configure Desktop:** This entry opens the
      :ref:`Lumina Configuration` utility.

    * **Lumina Desktop Information:** Click the :guilabel:`?` icon to
      determine the installed version of |lumina|.

    * **System Volume:** Use the mouse to move the volume control
      slider to change the system audio volume from 0% to 100%. Click
      the sound icon on the left to mute or unmute the speaker. If the
      operating system provides a mixer utility, click the speaker icon
      on the right to launch the mixer utility for advanced control of
      the audio system.

    * **Screen Brightness:** Use the mouse to move the brightness
      control slider from 10% to 100%.

    * **Workspace:** The number of available virtual workspaces are
      listed. Click the right or left arrow to switch between workspaces.

    * **Locale:** This will only appear if the lumina-i18n package is
      installed. The current locale will be displayed as the title of
      the drop-down menu. Click the drop-down menu to select another
      locale for this session. Refer to :ref:`User Settings` for more
      information on fine-tuning the locale settings.

    * **Back:** Click to return to the start menu.
  
* **Leave:** Click this entry to view options to
  :guilabel:`Suspend System` (if supported by the operating system,
  press the system's power button to login and resume operation),
  :guilabel:`Restart System` (if the user has permission),
  :guilabel:`Power Off System` (if the user has permission),
  :guilabel:`Sign Out User`, or press :guilabel:`Back` to return to the
  start menu. Alternately, click the :guilabel:`lock` icon next to
  :guilabel:`Leave` to lock the system, which will start the screensaver
  and password prompt to resume the session.

.. note:: On a |trueos| system which is applying updates, the shutdown 
   and restart options will be disabled until the updates are complete,
   with a note indicating updates are in progress.

.. _Panel and System Tray:

Panel and System Tray
=====================

By default, |lumina| provides a panel at the bottom of the screen with a
system tray at the far right of the panel. This section describes the
default layout. For instructions on how to configure the panel, refer to
the :ref:`Interface` section.
  
When opening windows or applications, a button will be added to the
section of the panel near the start menu. If the application provides
an icon, the button will appear with the icon and descriptive text.
Mouse over the button to show the full name of the application. Each
open window or application will have its own button on the panel. Click
a button to make that window active; click it again to minimize it.

Right-click the title of an open window to open a menu of options,
including stick, layer/dock, and set transparency, among other options.

The system tray is located in the right portion of the panel. Any
applications that register a tray icon will appear in this area. For
example, on a |trueos| system, icons will appear for Life Preserver, 
Mount Tray, and SysAdm™. Refer to :ref:`Interface` for instructions on
modifying which applications appear in the system tray. Click or
right-click an icon to interact with an application directly. The
current system time shown by the clock is in the default format for the
current locale. If you click the clock icon and then click "Time Zone",
a menu will open where you can select to either "Use System Time" or
click a country name in order to select a city to change to that city's
time zone.

.. index:: desktop context menu
.. _Desktop Context Menu:

Desktop Context Menu
====================

Right-clicking the desktop will open a menu of quick shortcuts with the
title of the menu indicating the name of the current workspace. This
section describes the default menu items. For instructions on how to
configure the right-click menu, refer to the
:ref:`Interface` section of this handbook.

By default, the right-click menu contains the following items:

* **Terminal:** Used to launch a system terminal. The default is
  :command:`xterm`, but this can be customized.

* **Browse Files:** Launches the default file manager.
  (:ref:`Insight File Manager` for Lumina)

* **Applications:** Provides shortcuts to the operating system's
  graphical software management utility (if available), the control
  panel (if the operating system provides one), and the applications
  currently registered on the system, arranged by system category.

* **Preferences:** Contains shortcuts to the screensaver preferences,
  desktop utility (:ref:`Lumina Configuration`), display configuration
  (:ref:`Lumina Xconfig`), the operating system's control panel, and
  |lumina| version information contained within "About |lumina|".

* **Leave:** Opens the system log out window, with options to log out of
  the desktop session, restart the system (if the user has permission),
  shutdown the system (if the user has permission), cancel the log out
  window, lock the system, or suspend the system (if the operating
  system supports suspend mode).
